Disclaimer: This speech was written for a class assignment. Opinions/views presented in this are not necessarily the author's.


(title) The Consitution, more then a law code.

"We the People of the United States...do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America". The masons, just like the 313.9 million other American citizens should (I hope) recognize these famous, world-changing words. They begin the 4,440 word document that our nation's core principals were founded on. But how often do we consider just how ground-breaking this document is?

Hello. I'm Max Wofford, a senior at El Segundo High School. Like many of you, law-codes aren't something I think about on a daily basis. The constitution, however, is much more then just a law-code. So how is it a 200 year old document has stayed as relevant today as it was the day it was drafted?  

The first thing to consider when thinking about the Constitution is that it was not our nation's first law code. Our founding fathers were not perfect, and the first attempt at a law-code had left the fledgling nation's government unstable. Benjamin Franklin once said "From such an assembly can a perfect production be expected?" Instead of trying to make the next law-code perfect, the Constitutional Convention drafted a law-code for a "more-perfect Union" which could amend itself as times change, staying as relevant in modern times as the day it was drafted.

At the time of the Constitution's drafting the idea of natural rights had existed for some time, but never before had there been a law-code "for the people". This ground-breaking concept that a government is owned by its people -no the other way around- has been a core principal of not only America, but of many other countries following in America's footsteps over the years.

The Constitution is a document like no other. Indeed, the very features which made it unique also contribute to its longevity. It can change with the times to stay as relevant in modern law as it was the day it was drafted. But the Constitution transcends simply being a law code. It is an idea, and a golden standard for how our country can work. It sets forth a cultural standard of freedom that is at the core of American society. 

The Constitution is one of America's most universally acclaimed documents. It set forth a law-code that supported a fledgling nation from its early days to the superpower it has become. It allows itself to be amended to stay relevant as times change. Through these unique aspects, the Constitution has not only been at the core of not only our legal system, but become the core of our society. 