As people, we are united by an unbreakable thread that can transcend time and space.  This common thread is called “humanity.” No matter where in the globe a baby is born, it will have shared experiences with a child born a thousand miles away. We are after all the same species. We all grow, live, lose, love, and die. Bildungsroman is set on every child’s path into adulthood, making it one of the strongest aspects of humanity. This commonality is a given, just as puberty is the next step in a child’s physical transformation into adulthood. Many literary stream of consciousness/ Bildungsroman classics tap into this shared experience, and their stories surpass the settings they take place in. Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, by author James Joyce is a perfect example of this.  The main character, Stephen Daedalus encounters many themes that make this novel a human novel. However, it is also an inherently an Irish novel.  Depending on where we are born, our culture and climate continues to shape our lives. This duplicitous state of existence hints at a deep tie between the setting and plot in A Portrait of the Artist. The innately human actions and interactions that the main character experiences in his journey are innately tied with the land he lives in. These two aspects ultimately come together to communicate Joyce’s work as a whole.

Stephen's childhood experiences are similar to any human child, "When you wet the bed first it is warm and then it gets cold."  Bedwetting is a common problem throughout childhood and has nothing to do with king or country. Children interact with animals similarly throughout the world as well, “Once upon a time and a very good time it was there was a moocow coming down along the road and this moocow that was coming down along the road met a nicens little boy named baby tuckoo, “These first lines of the novel represent Joyce's attempt to capture the perceptions of a very young boy. The language is universally childish: "moocow," "tuckoo," and "nicens" are words that a child might say regardless of being Irish. Stephen also has many human flaws, “The causes of his embitterment were many, remote and near. He was angry with himself for being young and the prey of restless foolish impulses, angry also with the change of fortune which was reshaping the world about him into a vision of squalor and insincerity.” Humans across the globe have moral dilemmas.  No matter if one is from South America or Europe it is likely that they have had foolish impulses or thoughts of them. This is what separates us from other species. Joyce references to common themes and ideas that many humans have. Stephen knows that he must strike out as an independent spirit, true to the inner promptings of his artistic instincts. Throughout time, brave humans have existed and refused to accept what is presented to them from family, culture and religion. There is a drive in them much like in Stephen to create something new out of the materials of their own experiences. 

Although, there are many human conditions throughout, the city of Dublin is necessary to this book. It’s inextricably tied to Stephen’s discontentment and to his sins; immersion in a bustling, often squalid urban space heightens Stephen’s awareness of his physical sense. The dirtiness of the city contrasts the spirit of possibility that surrounds the few natural spaces we encounter (such as Stephen’s summer idyll at Blackrock and the open, outward-looking expanse of the sea). Notably, the character most untouched by the darkness, sensuality, and cynicism of the city is Davin, whose country roots keep him at a distance from urban dangers. The political climate at the turn of the century Ireland is also particularly important; there’s a perpetual undercurrent of sadness and anger at the lack of Irish independence that runs through the entire text. The argument between Mr. Casey and Aunt Dante at the beginning of the novel lays out some of the sources of political tension. The brief recap is that many Irish people felt like Charles Stewart Parnell was their best chance to gain "Home Rule," that is, autonomy from England. Overall, Stephen has mixed feelings about his hometown. He often seems to think that Dublin is hopelessly mired in the past and unable to modernize like the great cosmopolitan cities of Europe. He thinks Dublin’s citizens are paralyzed by nostalgia and inaction – like his father, Simon Daedalus. On the other hand, he often finds beauty even in the dinginess of the red-light district, his cluttered home, or the seaweed he sees from the shore of the beach. Ireland is also often directly referenced to throughout the novel, "Trudging along the road or standing in some grimy wayside public house his elders spoke constantly of the subjects nearer their hearts, of Irish politics, of Munster and of the legends of their own family, to all of which Stephen lent an avid ear." "Do you know what Ireland is?” asked Stephen with cold violence. Ireland is the old sow that eats her farrow."
      
James Joyce was a man very much influenced by the human condition and his country. Stephen isn’t able to truly commit to his artistic calling until he has thrown off the ties of his past and really experiences life as an independent person. We end the book confident that he will find his artistic voice somewhere out there in the course of his wanderings. His closing lines, "Welcome, O life! I go to encounter for the millionth time the reality of experience and to forge in the smithy of my soul the uncreated conscience of my race… Old father, old artificer, stand me now and ever in good stead," speak volumes about what he hopes to accomplish. Stephen will attempt to express the "conscience of [his] race" – but ironically, he has to leave his country to do so. Stephen believes that he can only really gain a clear understanding of Ireland by looking at it objectively from afar. This shows that possibly part of the human condition is that we all have felt trapped by our surroundings at some point in our lives. "When the soul of a man is born in this country there are nets flung at it to hold it back from flight. You talk to me of nationality, language, religion. I shall try to fly by those nets." The novel draws to a close by invoking the universal Greek story of Daedalus, from the Epigraph, bidding Stephen to keep an eye out for his namesake as he leaves his homeland and ventures out into the world. Joyce successfully creates a novel that is not only quintessentially human but one that is soaked in the culture of the Irish people. 